My comments this month are drawn from First Corinthians 310,
let each one keep watching how he is building.
Building?
Are we talking about the upcoming construction of a facility
for headquarters departments in Ramapo, New York?
Or are we referring to the building of new kingdom halls
in your country?
Well, as important as those building projects are,
my comments are directed to an even more important building work.
Let's look at the context in First Corinthians 3 and verse 5.
A pause and Paul are mentioned by name
and what was their specific role identified to be?
Verse 5 says,
Ministers through whom you became believers.
A pause and Paul had taught the Scriptures to many in Corinth.
In verses 6 through 9,
Paul likens this teaching activity to the planting of a field.
Seeds of truth are planted in the heart of a person.
By means of return visits and Bible studies,
the seeds are watered.
But if the person is receptive,
then with Jehovah's spirit and blessing,
the truth will blossom and grow to the point of dedication and baptism.
Did you notice in verse 9,
Bible teachers are described as God's fellow workers?
What an awesome privilege we have to assist Jehovah
in gathering the precious things of all the nations.
So we now know the topic of these verses in First Corinthians 3.
It's discussing Bible teachers who help others to become believers.
But did you also notice that in verse 9,
Paul changes illustrations.
He said,
You are God's field under cultivation.
That's agricultural.
But then he changes the analogy saying God's building.
That's architectural.
That's construction.
Why the change in illustrations?
The building analogy highlights a specific point.
The illustration of the farmer doesn't focus on the farmer's impact on the growth of a plant.
In that illustration, the farmer waters the seedling.
But it's God that makes the plant grow.
However, the illustration of building or construction focuses on the builder's involvement
or the Bible teachers involvement.
The one constructing a building has considerable influence or the quality of the end product.
What kind of materials does he select?
Is he thorough in his work?
Or does he cut corners to get the job done faster?
Or with less effort?
Now let's read the 10th verse of First Corinthians chapter 3.
According to the undeserved kindness of God that was given to me,
I laid a foundation as a skilled master builder, but someone else is building on it.
But let each one keep watching how he is building on it.
There in Corinth, Paul as a master builder had initially acquainted many with the truth.
In effect, he laid a foundation for others to build on.
But what was that foundation?
Verse 11 says,
For no one can lay any other foundation than what is laid which is Jesus Christ.
Paul had helped establish the congregation there in Corinth based on the teachings of Jesus,
the foundation of the truth.
Building on that foundation, others would become Bible teachers and help still others to progress toward baptism.
That is why Paul cautioned in verse 10 to keep watching how we build.
We can affect the outcome.
So to all of us Bible teachers, including parents, we ask the question,
how are we building on the foundation?
Why does it really matter?
Let's read verses 12 and 13.
Now if anyone builds on the foundation, gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay or straw,
each one's work will be shown for what it is.
For the day will show it up because it will be revealed by means of fire
and the fire itself will prove what sort of work each one has built.
Do we understand how important it is to analyze our teaching techniques?
Will we use the best techniques possible to reach our student or our child's heart?
Or do we just try to get by with the bare essentials and affect a half-hearted effort using hay or straw as a word?
Some years ago, in one developing country during an economic boom,
it became a priority to build more and more schools.
Unfortunately, building requirements and materials were substandard.
Well, what happened when a 7.9 magnitude earthquake hit one of the areas?
Many schools in the earthquake zone crumbled while buildings around them remained standing.
An official report indicated that over 5,000 students died.
Think about it.
Prior to the earthquake, schools were in session and everything seemed fine.
Students and faculty were coming and going on a daily basis.
But the unforeseen earthquake proved that the building methods used were not of the quality needed to prevent collapse and terrible carnage.
First Corinthians 313 makes clear that how we build spiritually when teaching Bible students or our children is just as important.
Now, notice the sobering point made in verses 14 and 15.
If anyone's work that he has built on it remains, he will receive a reward.
If anyone's work is burned up, he will suffer loss.
But he himself will be saved, yet if so, it will be as through fire.
The point in verse 14 is that if we're conscientious and reach the heart of our Bible students,
that may be what gives them the needed fortitude to withstand an unexpected trial.
In that case, our diligent work remains.
Then verse 15 makes the point that if our teaching techniques were inconsistent or were in some way slip-shod,
a student may not successfully weather a fire or stormy trial in his life.
We personally may survive, but we might suffer the loss of the one we studied with,
whether a Bible student or our own child.
That's why Paul is highlighting the need to be the best Bible teacher we personally can be.
However, we should mention that if a person who progresses to dedication and baptism later leaves the truth,
it's not necessarily the responsibility of the Bible teacher.
The teacher may have been very diligent and use the best of spiritual building materials.
But the student or child may not have responded from his heart,
or possibly he allowed human imperfection or temptation to cause him to deviate from the way.
But the takeaway point from 1 Corinthians chapter 3 is to do our best to build in our students or children fire resistant materials.
We want them to remain, to endure the tests that are sure to come their way.
What might be likened to building with inferior materials when studying the Bible with someone?
Possibly, we initially arouse a person's interest by telling him about the hope of everlasting life and paradise.
That's indeed scriptural.
But is that in itself building in such a way that the person will survive a fiery trial of faith in the future?
What if our teaching consisted solely of saying,
if you want to live forever in paradise, you must study, go to the meetings, and share in the preaching work.
If so, we are not building in a way to ensure that the student or child will resist the fire of trials or stand the test of time.
In effect, we're using wood, hay, or straw.
Do you remember that Paul said we are to build on the foundation?
He said the foundation is Jesus Christ. That is solid.
Ephesians chapter 3, 16 and 17, helps us to understand what it means to build with quality materials such as gold, silver, and precious stones.
In verse 16, it makes clear that there's a way that we can be made mighty in the person we are inside.
Let's read verse 17,
and that through your faith you may have the Christ dwell in your hearts with love.
May you be rooted and established on the foundation.
How can we help our child or Bible student become strong or mighty spiritually?
Interestingly, verse 17 said that it's by having the Christ dwell in your hearts.
Not just knowing Jesus in the head, but sounding His teachings and personality down into our student's heart.
It means to know Jesus so well that it's as if He lives or dwells inside of us and motivates us as Christians.
The result, verse 17 concluded by saying that the student would become rooted and established on the foundation.
Yes, solidly grounded on Jesus Christ.
And Hebrews 1 3 says that Jesus is the reflection of God's glory and the exact representation of His very being.
Jesus Himself said,
No one comes to the Father except through me.
So building with fire-resistant materials means helping the student to love Jesus, yes.
But also having a close, loving relationship with Jehovah God Himself.
But why are we considering the theme?
Keep watching how you are building now.
Why is this more urgent than ever before?
It's because all indications scripturally and circumstantially point to Satan's evil system of things coming to an abrupt end.
The physical indications of Matthew chapter 24 and the bizarre temperament described in 2 Timothy 3 1 through 5 become more and more precise as we watch the scene of this world unfold.
We can expect even more opposition and persecution from those who are opposed to our resolve to stand on the side of Jehovah.
Our brothers in Russia and other lands are experiencing this now.
Some have been beaten and brutalized in other ways.
As we've heard, others have been sentenced to years in prison.
In recent years, the organization has reminded us of what we can expect as the great tribulation begins.
Do you remember this video clip from the pursue what builds loyalty video series shown at the 2016 regional convention?
In your faith has led you here as loyal servants of Jehovah, confident that Psalm 97 verse 10 applies to you personally.
Jehovah is guarding the lives of his loyal ones.
That video series has been affectionately called the basement video.
It was depicting one possible scenario that could be considered a fire according to 1 Corinthians 313.
The serious question we want to ask ourselves is, would my Bible student or child be in the basement with those other faithful brothers and sisters?
If not, would the reason be because of his own lack of faith or might it at least in part be because we did not take our responsibility as a teacher seriously enough?
Did we build with fire resistant materials or in effect with hay or straw?
The same verse said, for the day we'll show it up.
The fire itself will prove what sort of work each one has built.
It's a sobering thought, isn't it?
If you recall in the May 2020 JW broadcasting monthly program,
further let address the concern a few parents have expressed about some of our videos that depict biblical or modern day situations.
In these times true worshipers are depicted as having their faith tested as if by fire.
The concern expressed as it some scenes could have an effect on children who've been protected from all negative circumstances on TV, including daily news reports of catastrophes being faced by real people.
The basement scene we just reviewed was one of our videos that produced such a reaction.
Another one was the reenactment of the Bible account depicting Jehovah's Saving Acts in the time of King Hezekiah.
It was shown at the 2016 regional convention and the video was entitled, oh Jehovah, I trust in you.
Let's look again at that portrayal of Jehovah's Saving Acts.
If a parent has shielded his child from viewing all scenes on the news or other visual images depicting negative realities,
it's understandable that there may be a concern.
However, as Brother Let's stated, parents need to give their children a realistic idea of what we will face in the near future.
Many parents choose to help their children appreciate the graphic visual imagery of a Bible based account while at the same time building trust in Jehovah who will be with them in times of distress.
The point is friends, the Bible warns us young and old alike that a time of fiery testing looms on the horizon.
We want to be realistic and face these events with faith and courage.
Our videos depict such circumstances in a tasteful and sanitized way, not showing any actual acts of bloodshed or violence.
Be assured that the governing body is not trying to scare anyone.
Instead, we are trying to prepare everyone.
We feel responsible to fortify the brotherhood by using fire-resistant building materials in the spirit of 1 Corinthians chapter 3.
As teachers of the Word of God, may we all give prayerful thought to the methods, techniques, and the diligence we display when conducting Bible studies.
We're motivated by the very spirit of Jehovah God, the words at 2 Peter 3.9 come to mind.
After Jehovah it says, he does not desire anyone to be destroyed, but desires all to attain to repentance.
May that be our resolve, as we take to heart the inspired words of 1 Corinthians 3.10, let each one keep watching how he is building.